---
NEP: 0460
Title: Zero Gas Limit
Author: Anton Puhach <anton@near.org>, Aleksandr Logunov <alex.logunov@near.org>
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/0460
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Category: Runtime
Created: 09-Feb-2023
---

## Summary

The main idea of this proposal is to start producing empty chunks if the blockchain is not able to reach consensus for the last `X` blocks.
This can be achieved by setting gas limit for these chunks to `0`, hence the name of this NEP.

In particular we want to set shard chunk header `gas_limit` field to `0` if the difference between `height_created` and the height of the last final block is greater than `X`.

## Motivation

Primary motivation behind this proposal is to limit [Flat Storage](https://github.com/near/NEPs/blob/master/neps/nep-0399.md) memory required for `FlatStateDelta` (FSD).
We store all state changes after the last final block as FSD and we have to store those in RAM in order to guarantee fast access.
Currently we can have arbitrarily long forks since Doomslug consensus doesn't limit the distance between chain head and the last final block.
This can potentially result in neard running out of memory for storing FSD.
This proposal solves the issue since empty chunk doesn't result in any state changes, so FSD for such chunk is also empty hence it doesn't require any memory.

Another reason to have this is to promote faster consensus. Not having any final block for `X` blocks means that the chain is in a problematic state.
Forcing chunk producers to produce empty blocks reduces load on the network and could help to reach consensus faster.

## Rationale and alternatives

One alternative was to design Flat Storage so that it can handle long forks.
We tried storing only a subset of FSD in memory and reading the rest from disk.
Unfortunately performance overhead of such approach was not acceptable.
TODO Alex: maybe add more details here?

It was also considered to use distance to the last final block instead of height difference.
This was rejected because we can still have an unbounded number of short forks which could causes the same memory issues for FSD.

## *WIP* Specification

Explain the proposal as if it was already implemented and you were teaching it to another developer. That generally means:

- Introducing new named concepts.
- Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
- If the feature introduces new abstractions, explaining how users and/or developers should _think_ about it;
- If applicable, describe the differences between the existing functionality.

For user-facing NEPs, this section should focus on user stories.

## Reference Implementation (Required for Protocol Working Group proposals, optional for other categories)

This is the technical portion of the NEP. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

- Its interaction with other features is clear.
- Where possible, include a `Minimum Viable Interface` subsection expressing the required behavior and types in a target Near Contract language. (ie. traits and structs for rust, interfaces and classes for javascript, function signatures and structs for c, etc.)
- It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

## Security Implications (Optional)

If there are security concerns concerning the NEP, those concerns should be explicitly written out to make sure reviewers of the NEP are aware of them.

## Drawbacks (Optional)

Why should we **not** do this?

## Unresolved Issues (Optional)

- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the NEP process before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this NEP that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this NEP?

## Future possibilities

Think about what the natural extension and evolution of your proposal would
be and how it would affect the project as a whole in a holistic
way. Try to use this section as a tool to more fully consider all possible
interactions with the project in your proposal.
Also, consider how all fits into the roadmap for the project
and of the relevant sub-team.

This is also a good place to "dump ideas"; if they are out of scope for the
NEP you are writing but otherwise related.

If you have tried and cannot think of any future possibilities,
you may simply state that you cannot think of anything.

Note that having something written down in the future-possibilities section
is not a reason to accept the current or a future NEP. Such notes should be
in the section on motivation or rationale in this or subsequent NEPs.
The section merely provides additional information.

## Copyright

[copyright]: #copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
