---
NEP: 360
Title: Reduce minimum gas price
Author: Marko Bosnic <marko@tonic.foundation>
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/0360
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Category: Contract
Created: 26-May-2022
---

## Summary

Gas fees on NEAR are artificially high. The solution is to reduce the minimum gas price (also known as floor price).
NEAR’s gas floor price is currently 0.0001 NEAR/Tgas. ([explorer](https://explorer.near.org/), [nearcore](https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/f951d6ed8e491ef842da6bd9448d3242472c126b/nearcore/res/mainnet_genesis.json#L16)). This means that a user must pay at least that gas price for any transaction, regardless of how many transactions are in a block. While a fee market is necessary for efficient use of network resources (see Solana’s [recent congestion issues](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/22820) for an example of issues caused by not having a fee market), a high floor price does not create a real fee market. Lowering the floor price does not preclude the ability for a stable fee market to form when the network is close to maximum capacity.

## Motivation
### NEAR is well below capacity
NEAR had ~640k transactions in the last 24 hours according to the [block explorer](https://explorer.near.org/). This is probably a slight overestimate since it includes failed transactions from Aurora, the most active contract on the network. See the contract [transaction history](https://explorer.near.org/accounts/aurora) to see a sample of recent failures.

Let’s be generous and say the network averages 8 successful transactions per second on average. An FT transfer is 8 tgas, while a swap on Ref Finance (with an existing exchange balance) is 14 tgas. The gas limit per block is 1000 Tgas [source](https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/f951d6ed8e491ef842da6bd9448d3242472c126b/nearcore/res/mainnet_genesis.json#L15). Suppose the average smart contract transaction uses 10 tgas. This implies ~100 transactions per block per shard, assuming no other bottlenecks. With 4 shards on mainnet that means the network is operating at approximately 2% capacity.

NEAR is operating nowhere close to capacity and currently has a fraction of the activity of the major L1s - it has the highest mcap/TVL ratio of any chain in the top 30 on [Defi Llama](https://defillama.com/chains). At $10, a fungible token transaction is 0.8 cents. On Solana, a network with at least 100x the current transaction volumes of NEAR, an SPL token transfer is 0.000005 SOL (~0.02 cents, 97% cheaper).

## Rationale and alternatives
### Prior Art
The last major discussion around NEAR's gas prices was in 2020 [NEP-92](https://github.com/near/NEPs/issues/92). The original intent was to leave room to reduce fees later. The increase from NEP-92 was done shortly after the mainnet launch, and NEAR was 90%+ cheaper at the time.

### Benefits and Ecosystem Impact
NEAR is a volatile asset and the price increases faster than network activity. Increased gas costs when there is no shortage of block space is effectively a tax paid by users due to speculative market activity.

While paying a cent for an average transaction might not seem like an issue for an infrequent user, these costs add up for liquidiy providers/arbitrageurs who improve the efficiency of markets on-chain. This makes NEAR look even worse relatively if there is another rally in the token price without corresponding network growth.

Cutting fees will make NEAR even more competitive with top L1s. The ecosystem has had considerable momentum in the last few months, and NEAR’s sharding model will continue to generate interest among developers. A reduction in fees will enable more applications to build on NEAR in an economically viable way, which will drive consumer adoption.

## Specification
This proposal is to reduce the minimum price of gas from 0.0001 N/Tgas to 0.00001 N/Tgas. The total cost of a transaction is gas price * gas amount.

## Reference Implementation (Required for Contract category, optional for other categories)

The implementation of this proposal is submitted as a PR to nearcore - [pull/6869](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/6869).

This is the technical portion of the NEP. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

- Its interaction with other features is clear.
- Where possible, include a `Minimum Viable Interface` subsection expressing the required behavior and types in a target Near Contract language. (ie. traits and structs for rust, interfaces and classes for javascript, function signatures and structs for c, etc.)
- It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

## Security Implications (Optional)
Reducing the gas floor price will reduce the theoretical cost of a short DDOS attack on the network. Note that the dollar cost for an attack has dropped >50% during several price drops without a corresponding increase in attempts to flood the network.


## Drawbacks (Optional)
- Decreased protocol revenue: Relative to the market cap protocol revenue is currently negligible. NEAR trades at > 900 P/E ratio according to TokenTerminal [7].
- Technical difficulties: I’m not familiar with the core NEAR codebase, but from a quick glance this could be achieved with minimal changes [2].

## Unresolved Issues (Optional)
- What should the new max gas multiplier be? It's not obvious that reducing the floor price 10x should merit a 10x increase in the max gas multiplier. Since cheaper block space will increase the probability of a block being full, the gas multiplier may need to increase by more than 10x in order to limit potential network congestion.

## Future possibilities
- Dynamically adjusted gas floor price
- Should NEAR have a gas floor price at all?

## Copyright
[copyright]: #copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
