---
NEP: 330
Title: Contract Metadata
Author: Ben Kurrek <ben.kurrek@near.org>
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/near/NEPs/discussions/329
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Category: Contract
Created: 27-Feb-2022
---

## Summary

The contract metadata is a standard interface that allows auditing and viewing source code for a deployed smart contract. Implementation of this standard is purely optional but is recommended for developers whose contracts are open source.

## Motivation

There is no trivial way of finding the source code or author of a deployed smart contract. Having a standard that outlines how to view the source code of an arbitrary smart contract creates an environment of openness and collaboration.

The initial discussion can be found [here](https://github.com/near/NEPs/discussions/329).

## Rationale and alternatives

There is a lot of information that can be held about a contract. Ultimately, we wanted to limit it to the least amount fields while still maintaining our goal. This decision was made to not bloat the contracts with unnecessary storage and also to keep the standard simple and understandable.

## Specification

Successful implementations of this standard will introduce a new  (`ContractMetadata`) struct that will hold all the necessary information to be queried for. This struct will be kept on the contract level.

The metadata will include two optional fields:
- `version`: a string that references the specific commit hash or version of the code that is currently deployed on-chain. This can be included regardless of whether or not the contract is open-sourced and can also be used for organizational purposes.
- `link`: a string that references the link to the open-source code. This can be anything such as Github or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.

```ts
type ContractMetadata = {
  version: string|null, // optional, commit hash being used for the currently deployed wasm. If the contract is not open-sourced, this could also be a numbering system for internal organization / tracking such as "1.0.0" and "2.1.0".
  link: string|null, //optional,  link to open source code such as a Github repository or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.
}
```

In order to view this information, contracts must include a getter which will return the struct.

```ts
function contract_metadata(): ContractMetadata {}
```

## Reference Implementation

As an example, say there was an NFT contract deployed on-chain which was currently using the commit hash `39f2d2646f2f60e18ab53337501370dc02a5661c` and had its open source code located at `https://github.com/near-examples/nft-tutorial`. This contract would then include a struct which has the following fields:

```ts
type ContractMetadata = {
  version: "39f2d2646f2f60e18ab53337501370dc02a5661c"
  link: "https://github.com/near-examples/nft-tutorial"
}
```

If someone were to call the view function `contract_metadata`, the contract would return:

```bash
{
    version: "39f2d2646f2f60e18ab53337501370dc02a5661c"
    link: "https://github.com/near-examples/nft-tutorial"
}
```


## Future possibilities

- By having a standard outlining metadata for an arbitrary contract, any information that pertains on a contract level can be added based on the requests of the developer community.

## Copyright
[copyright]: #copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).