---
NEP: 413
Title: Near Wallet API - support for verifyOwner method
Author: Philip Obosi <philip@near.org>, Guillermo Gallardo <guillermo@near.org>
# DiscussionsTo:
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Category: Wallet
Created: 25-Oct-2022
---

## Summary

A standardized Wallet API method, namely `verifyOwner`, that allows users to be authenticated in third-party services using their NEAR account.

## Motivation
NEAR users want to use their accounts as means of authentication in third-party services, in a similar fashion to how mainstream Web2 accounts can be used (e.g. "Login with Facebook").

Currently, there is no standardized way for wallets to sign a message for authentication. 

## Rationale and Alternatives
Users want to be authenticated into a service without incurring in GAS fees, nor compromising their account's security. This means that:

1) The message must be signed off chain, with no transaction being involved.
2) The message being signed must include the service's name.
3) The message being signed cannot represent a valid transaction.
3) The message must be signed using a Full Access Key.
4) The signature should be simple to produce/verify, and transmitted securely.

### Why Off Chain?
So the user would not incur in GAS fees, nor the signed authentication gets broadcasted into a public network.

### Why The Message Being Signed MUST NOT be a Transaction?
An attacker could make the user inadvertently sign a valid transaction which, once signed, could be submitted into the network to execute it.

### Why The Message Needs to Include a Service Identifier?
To avoid replay attacks, i.e. a malicious app requesting the user to authenticate in their service, only to use the authentication message in a third-app. 

Including the service's identifier (e.g. domain name) and making sure the user knows about it should mitigate this kind of attacks.

### Why a FullAccess Key? Why Not Simply Creating an [FunctionCall Key](https://docs.near.org/concepts/basics/accounts/access-keys) for Signing?
The most common flow for [NEAR user authentication into a Web3 frontend](https://docs.near.org/develop/integrate/frontend#user-sign-in--sign-out) involves the creation of a [FunctionCall Key](](https://docs.near.org/concepts/basics/accounts/access-keys)).

One might feel tempted to reproduce such process here, for example, by creating a key that can only be used to call a non-existing method in the user's account. This is a bad idea for several reasons:
1. It implies that the user needs to expend gas in creating a new key.
2. Since any third-party can ask the user to create a `FunctionCall Key`, this opens a vector of attack.

Using a FullAccess key allows us to be sure that the message was signed by the user (since nobody should have access to their `FullAccess Key`), while keeping the constraints of not expending gas in the process (because no new key needs to be created).

### How to Return the Signed Message in a Safe Way
Sending the signature in a query string to an arbitrary URL (even within the correct domain) is not secure as the data can be leaked (e.g. through headers, etc). Using URL fragments instead will improve security, since the fragment isn't included in the Referrer. Further constraining the callback URL to a fixed value will improve security even more.

### NEAR Signatures
NEAR transaction signatures are not plain Ed25519 signatures but Ed25519 signatures of a SHA-256 hash (see [near/nearcore#2835](https://github.com/near/nearcore/issues/2835)). Any protocol that signs anything with NEAR account keys should use the same signature format.

## Specification
Given the previous [rationales](#rationale-and-alternatives), this NEP proposes the wallets to implement a `verifyOwner` method following the specifications bellow.


### Goal
The `verifyOwner` method must take a plain text `message` and transform it into a signature.

### Input Interface
In order to sign a message, `verifyOwner` must implement the following input interface:

```jsx
interface VerifyOwnerParams {
  message: string; // The message requested to be signed, should contain the app name.
  callbackUrl?: string; // Applicable to browser wallets (e.g. MyNearWallet). This is the callback url once the signing is approved. Defaults to `window.location.href`.
  meta?: string; // Applicable to browser wallets (e.g. MyNearWallet) extra data that will be passed to the callback url once the signing is approved.
}
```

### Structure and Signature
In order to respect all the points layed in [rationales](#rationale-and-alternatives), `verifyOwner` must:

1. Embed the passed `message` into a predefined structure (see below).
2. Stringify the structure 
2. Compute the `SHA256 hash` of the *stringified structure*.
3. Use a full-access key to sign the resulting `SHA256 hash`.

#### Structure
The structure must have the following interface:

```rust
struct Payload {
  accountId: string; // Mandatory: the account name as plain text (e.g. "alice.near")
  message: string; // The same message passed in `VerifyOwnerParams.message` 
  blockId: string; // The hash of a block created close to the time of signature
  publicKey: string; // public counterpart of the key used to sign, encoded as a string with format "<key-type>:<base-64-key-bytes>"
}
```

#### Signature
In order to create a signature, the `Payload` must be converted into its `string` representation (respecting the attribute's order given above), and then hashed using `SHA256`.

For example, assuming that:
1. `alice.near` wants to sign the message `"berryclub.io"`.
2. The wallet stores a private key which public counterpart is: `ed25519:6TupyNrcHGTt5XRLmHTc2KGaiSbjhQi1KHtCXTgbcr4Y`
3. A recent block was produced with the block hash `12FaoFyjYGmuxXnvWGYqxvUqGesSjdFVBNWXkXvoj41M`.

The wallet should sign the **`SHA256` hash** of the following string:

```jsx
sha256.hash(`{"accountId":"alice.near","message":"berryclub.io","blockId":"12FaoFyjYGmuxXnvWGYqxvUqGesSjdFVBNWXkXvoj41M","publicKey":"ed25519:6TupyNrcHGTt5XRLmHTc2KGaiSbjhQi1KHtCXTgbcr4Y"}`)
```

### Output Interface
`verifyOwner` must return a object containing the **base64** representation of the `signature`, and all the data necessary to verify such signature. 

```jsx
interface AuthenticationToken {
  accountId: string; // The account name as plain text (e.g. "alice.near")
  message: string; // The same message passed in `VerifyOwnerParams.message` 
  blockId: string; // The hash of a block created close to the time of signature
  publicKey: string; // The public counterpart of the key used to sign, expressed as a string with format "<key-type>:<base-64-key-bytes>"
  signature: string; // The base64 representation of the signature.
}
```

### Returning the signature
Web Wallets, such as [MyNearWallet](https://mynearwallet.com), should directly return the `AuthenticationToken` to the `VerifyOwnerParams.callbackUrl`, passing `accountId`, `message`, `blockId`, `publicKey` as strings, and the signature as an URL fragment. This is: `<callbackUrl>?accountId=<accountId>&message=<message>...#signature=<signature>`.

Non-web Wallets, such as [Ledger](https://www.ledger.com), can directly return the `AuthenticationToken`, in preference as a JSON object.

### Verifying the Signature
To authenticate a user via the `AuthenticationToken` there are 5 steps that you need to perform:
1. Make sure the `AuthenticationToken.message` is exactly the one you asked the user to sign.
2. Verify that the `AuthenticationToken.publicKey` belongs to the `AuthenticationToken.accountId`.
3. Reconstruct the `Payload` locally
4. Use the `AuthenticationToken.publicKey` to verify that the reconstructed `Payload` matches the `AuthenticationToken.signature`.
5. (Optionally) Make sure that the signature is recent by using the `timestamp` of the block with hash `AuthenticationToken.blockId`.

> See the [reference section](#references---verification) for an example code on how to verify a user.

## References

### Signature
This interface is now supported by Wallet Selector as shown below:

1. [Pull Request Implementing `verifyOwner` in near/wallet-selector#391](https://github.com/near/wallet-selector/pull/391).
2. [https://github.com/near/wallet-selector/pull/436/files](https://github.com/near/wallet-selector/pull/436/files).

### Verification
We also include an example on [how to verify the authentication signature](https://github.com/gagdiez/near-login/blob/main/server/authenticate/wallet-authenticate.js).

## Drawbacks
Accounts that do not hold a FullAccess Key will not be able to sign authentication messages, however, this is a necessary tradeoff for security.

## Copyright
[copyright]: #copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
