---
NEP: 536
Title: Reduce the number of gas refunds
Authors: Evgeny Kuzyakov <ek@fastnear.com>, Bowen Wang <bowen@near.org>
Status: Final
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/536
Type: Protocol
Version: 1.0.0
Created: 2024-03-12
LastUpdated: 2023-03-12
---

## Summary

[Gas refund](https://docs.near.org/concepts/basics/transactions/gas#attach-extra-gas-get-refunded) is a mechanism that allows users to get refunded for gas that is not used during the execution of a smart contract. Due to [pessimistic gas pricing](https://docs.near.org/concepts/basics/transactions/gas-advanced#pessimistic-gas-price-inflation), however, even transactions that do not involve function calls generate refunds because users need to pay at a high price and get refunded the difference. Gas refunds lead to nontrivial overhead in runtime and other places, which hurts the performance of the protocol. This proposal aims to reduce the number of gas refunds and prepare for future changes that completely remove gas refunds.

## Motivation

Refund receipts create nontrivial overhead: they need to be merklized and sent across shards. In addition, the processing of refund receipts requires additional storage reads and writes, which is not optimal for the performance of the protocol. In addition, when there is congestion, refund receipts may be delayed during execution. Whenever this happens, it requires two additional storage writes to store a gas refund receipt and two additional reads and writes when they are later processed, which incurs a significant overhead. To optimize the performance of the protocol under congestion, it is imperative that we reduce the number of refund receipts.

## Specification

Pessimistic gas pricing is removed as a part of this change. This means that transactions that do not involve function calls will not generate gas refund receipts as a result. For function calls, this proposal introduces cost of refund to be

```rust
REFUND_FIXED_COST = action_receipt_creation + action_transfer + action_add_function_call_key
refund_cost = max(REFUND_FIXED_COST, 0.05 * gas_refund);
```

per receipt. The refund fixed cost includes consideration for implicit accounts (created on transfer) and refund for access key allowance, which requires an access key update. The design of refund cost is supposed to penalize developers from attaching too much gas
and creating unnecessary refunds. Some examples:

* If the contract wants to refund 280Tgas, burning 5% of it would be about 14Tgas, which is a significant cost and developers would be encouraged to optimize it on the frontend.
* If refund is 100Tgas, then 5% is 5Tgas, which is still significant and discourages developers from doing so.
* If the refund is <10Tgas (very common case for cross-contract call self-callbacks), the penalty should be just 500Ggas, which is less than the gas refund cost. So only the fixed refund cost will be charged from gas to spawn the gas refund receipt. No UX will be broken for legacy cross-contract call contracts, so long as frontend correctly estimates the required gas in worst case scenario.


## Reference Implementation

The protocol changes are as follows:

* When a transaction is converted to a receipt, there is no longer a `pessmistic_gas_price` multiplier when the signer balance is deducted. Instead, the signer is charged `transaction_gas_cost * gas_price`. If the transaction succeeds, then unless the transaction contains a function call action, it will not generate any refund. On the other hand, when a transaction with multiple action fails, there is gas refund for the rest of unexecuted actions, same as how the protocol works today.
* For function calls, if X gas is attached during the execution of a receipt and Y gas is used+burnt, then `max(0, X-Y-refund_cost)` is refunded at the original gas price where `refund_cost = max(REFUND_FIXED_COST, 0.05 * X-Y)`. In the case the refund is 0 then no refund receipt is generated.
* Tokens burnt on refund cost is counted towards tx_balance_burnt and the part over `REFUND_FIXED_COST` is not counted towards gas limit to avoid artificially limiting throughput.
* Because refund cost is now separate, action costs do not need to account for refund and therefore should be recalculated and reduced.

## Security Implications

This change may lead to less correct charging for transactions when there is congestion. However, the entire gas price mechanism needs to be rethought any ways and when only one or two shards are congested, the gas price wouldn't change so there is no difference.

## Alternatives

One altnerative is to completely remove gas refunds by burning all prepaid gas. This idea was [discussed](https://github.com/near/NEPs/issues/107) before. However, it would be a very drastic change and may very negatively damage the developer experience.
The approach outlined in this proposal has less impact on developer and user experience and may be extended to burning all prepaid gas in the future.

## Future possibilities

* Burning all prepaid gas is a natural extension to this proposal, which would completely get rid of gas refunds. This, however, would be a major change to the developer experience of NEAR and should be treated cautiously.
At the very least, developers should be able to easily estimate how much gas a function within a smart contract is going to consume during execution.

## Consequences

[This section describes the consequences, after applying the decision. All consequences should be summarized here, not just the "positive" ones. Record any concerns raised throughout the NEP discussion.]

### Positive

* p1

### Neutral

* n1

### Negative

* n1

### Backwards Compatibility

Developers may need to change the amount of gas they attach when they write client side code that interacts with smart contracts to avoid getting penalized. However, this is not too difficult to do.

## Changelog

[The changelog section provides historical context for how the NEP developed over time. Initial NEP submission should start with version 1.0.0, and all subsequent NEP extensions must follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/). Every version should have the benefits and concerns raised during the review. The author does not need to fill out this section for the initial draft. Instead, the assigned reviewers (Subject Matter Experts) should create the first version during the first technical review. After the final public call, the author should then finalize the last version of the decision context.]

### 1.0.0 - Initial Version

> Placeholder for the context about when and who approved this NEP version.

#### Benefits

> List of benefits filled by the Subject Matter Experts while reviewing this version:

* Benefit 1
* Benefit 2

#### Concerns

> Template for Subject Matter Experts review for this version:
> Status: New | Ongoing | Resolved

|   # | Concern | Resolution | Status |
| --: | :------ | :--------- | -----: |
|   1 |         |            |        |
|   2 |         |            |        |

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
