---
NEP: 366
Title: Meta Transactions
Author: Illia Polosukhin <ilblackdragon@gmail.com>
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/366
Status: Draft
Type: Protocol Track
Category: Runtime
Created: 21-Jun-2022
---

## Summary

In-protocol meta transactions allowing for third-party account to initiate and pay transaction fees on behalf of the account.

## Motivation

NEAR has been designed with simplicity of onboarding in mind. One of the large hurdles right now is that after creating an implicit or even named account the user does not have NEAR to pay gas fees to interact with apps.

For example, apps that pay user for doing work (like NEARCrowd or Sweatcoin) or free-to-play games.

[Aurora Plus](https://aurora.plus) has shown viability of the relayers that can offer some number of free transactions and a subscription model. Shifting the complexity of dealing with fees to the infrastructure from the user space.

## Rationale and alternatives

The proposed design here provides the easiest way for users and developers to onboard and to pay for user transactions.
There are no requirements on the user account. The user account may not even exist on the chain and an implicit account can be used instead.

An alternative is to a proxy contracts deployed on the user account.
This design has severe limitations as it requires the user to deploy such contract and incur additional costs for storage.

## Specification

The main flow of the meta transaction will be as follows:
 - User signs a `DelegateActionMessage` specifying the set of actions that they need to be executed. It will also specify a relayer to ensure secure execution.
 - User sends the signed `DelegateAction` data to the relayer.
 - Relayer forms a `Transaction` with `receiver_id` equal to the user's account and `actions: [DelegateAction { ... }]` and signs it with it's key. Note that such transactions can contain other actions toward user's account (for example calling a function).
 - This transaction is processed normally. A `Receipt` is created with a copy of the actions in the transaction.
 - When processing a `DelegateAction`, a number of checks are done (see below), mainly a check to ensure that the `signature` matches the user account's key.
 - When a `Receipt` with a valid `DelegateAction` in actions arrives at the user's account, it gets executed. Execution means creation of a new Receipt with `receiver_id: AccountId` and `actions: Action` matching `receiver_id` and `actions` in the `DelegateAction`.
 - The new `Receipt` looks like a normal receipt that could have originated from the user's account, with `predeccessor_id` equal to user's account.

### DelegateAction

Delegate actions allows for an account to initiate a batch of actions on behalf of a receiving account, allowing proxy actions. This can be used to implement meta transactions.

```rust
pub struct DelegateAction {
    /// Receiver of the delegated actions.
    receiver_id: AccountId,
    /// List of actions to be executed.
    actions: Vec<Action>,

    /// Public key that is used to sign this delegated action.
    signer_pk: PublicKey,
    /// Nonce to ensure that the same delegate action is not sent twice by a relayer and should match for given account's `signer_pk`.
    /// After this action is processed it will increment.
    nonce: Nonce,
    /// Signature of the originating user signing `DelegateActionMessage` formed out of the data in the `DelegateAction`.
    signature: Signature,
}
```

 Supporting batches of `actions` means `DelegateAction` can be used initiate a complex steps like creating new accounts, transferring funds, deploying contracts, and executing an initialization function all within the same transaction.

***Validation***:
To ensure that a `DelegateAction` is correct, on receipt the following signature verification is performed: `verify_signature(hash(message), signer_pk, signature)`.

A `message` is formed in the following format and it must be signed by the user:
```rust
struct DelegateActionMessage {
    /// If not None, then should match the `predecessor_id` that created the `DelegateAction`.
    sender_id: Option<AccountId>,
    /// Matching the given account_id.
    signer_id: AccountId,
    /// Should match the `signer_pk` from the `DelegateAction`.
    public_key: PublicKey,
    /// Nonce for the given `public_key` from the `DelegateAction`.
    nonce: Nonce,
    /// Should match the `receiver_id` from the `DelegateAction`.
    receiver_id: AccountId,
    /// Block hash to ensure validity.
    block_hash: CryptoHash,
    /// Should match `actions` from the `DelegateAction`.
    actions: Vec<Action>,
}
```

The next set of security concerns are addressed by this format:
 - If format matches `Transaction`, then the relayer can just send it directly, not receiving payment.
 - Because the set of actions can include payment for the relayer (for example in FT), the `sender_id` is added directly into the message to ensure that nobody else can send this message.
 - `nonce` is included to ensure that this message can't be replayed again.
 - `public_key` and `signer_id` are needed to ensure the on the right account, work across rotating keys and fetch correct `nonce`.

The permissions are verified based on the variant of `signer_pk`:
 - `AccessKeyPermission::FullAccess`, all actions are allowed.
 - `AccessKeyPermission::FunctionCall`, only a single `FunctionCall` action is allowed in `actions`.
    - `DelegateAction.receiver_id` must match to the `account[public_key].receiver_id`
    - `DelegateAction.actions[0].method_name` must be in the `account[public_key].method_names`

***Outcomes***:
- If the `signature` matches the receiver's account's `signer_pk`, a new receipt is created from this account with a set of `ActionReceipt { receiver_id, action }` for each action in `actions`.

#### Errors

**Validation Error**
- If the `signer_pk` does not exist for the given account, the following error will be returned
```rust
/// Signer key for delegate action is missing from the given account
DelegateActionSignerDoesNotExist
```

- If the `nonce` does not exist match the `signer_pk` for the `receiver_id`, the the following error will be returned
```rust
/// Nonce must be account[signer_pk].nonce + 1
DelegateActionInvalidNonce
```

- If the `signature` does not match the data and the `signer_pk` of the given key, then the following error will be returned
```rust
/// Signature does not match the provided actions and given signer public key.
DelegateActionInvalidSignature
```


See the [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for details.

## Security Implications

Delegate actions do not override `signer_pk`, leaving that to the original signer that initiated transaction (e.g. the relayer in the meta transaction case). Although it is possible to override the `signer_pk` in the context with one from the `DelegateAction`, there is no clear value in that.

See the ***Validation*** section in [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for security considerations around what the user signs and the validation of actions with different permissions.

## Drawbacks

Increases complexity of NEAR's transactional model.

Meta transactions take an extra block to execute, as they first need to be included by the originating account, then routed to the delegate account, and only after that to the real destination.

Delegate actions are not programmable as they require having signatures. Original proposal contained a new `AccessKey` kind that would support programmable delegated actions. On the other hand, that would be limiting without programmability of smart contracts, hence that idea evolved into [Account Extensions](https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/346).

## Future possibilities

Supporting ZK proofs instead of just signatures can allow for anonymous transactions, which pay fees to relayers anonymously.

## Copyright
[copyright]: #copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
