---
NEP: 514
Title: Reducing the number of Block Producer Seats in `testnet`
Authors: Nikolay Kurtov <nikolay.kurtov@near.org>
Status: Final
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/514
Type: Protocol
Version: 1.0.0
Created: 2023-10-25
LastUpdated: 2023-10-25
---

## Summary

This proposal aims to adjust the number of block producer seats on `testnet` in
order to ensure a positive number of chunk-only producers present in `testnet`
at all times.

## Motivation

The problem is that important code paths are not exercised in `testnet`. This
makes `mainnet` releases more risky than they have to be, and greatly slows
down development of features related to chunk-only producers, such as State
Sync.

That is because `testnet` has fewer validating nodes than the number of block
producer seats configured.

The number of validating nodes on `testnet` is somewhere in the range of
[26, 46], which means that all validating nodes are block producers and none of
them are chunk-only producers. [Grafana](https://nearinc.grafana.net/goto/7Kh81P7IR?orgId=1).

`testnet` configuration is currently the following:

* `"num_block_producer_seats": 100,`
* `"num_block_producer_seats_per_shard": [ 100, 100, 100, 100 ],`
* `"num_chunk_only_producer_seats": 200,`

It's evident that the 100 block producer seats significantly outnumber the
validating nodes in `testnet`.

An alternative solution to the problem stated above can be the following:

1. Encourage the community to run more `testnet` validating nodes
1. Release owners or developers of features start a lot of validating nodes to
1. ensure `testnet` gets some chunk-only producing nodes.
1. Exercise the unique code paths in a separate chain, a-la `localnet`.

Let's consider each of these options.

### More community nodes

This would be the ideal perfect situation. More nodes joining will make
`testnet` more similar to `mainnet`, which will have various positive effects
for protocol developers and dApp developers.

However, this option is expensive, because running a validating node costs
money, and most community members can't afford spending that amount of money for
the good of the network.

### More protocol developer nodes

While this option may seem viable, it poses significant financial challenges for
protocol development. The associated computational expenses are exorbitantly
high, making it an impractical choice for sustainable development.

### Test in separate chains

That is the current solution, and it has significant drawbacks:

* Separate chains are short-lived and may miss events critical to the unique
  code paths of chunk-only producers
* Separate chains need special attention to be configured in a way that
  accommodates for chunk-only producers. Most test cases are not concerned about
  them, and don't exercise the unique code paths.
* Separate chains can't process real transaction traffic. The traffic must
  either be synthetic or "inspired" by real traffic.
* Each such test has a significant cost of running multiple nodes, in some
  cases, tens of nodes.

## Specification

The proposal suggests altering the number of block producer seats to ensure that
a portion of the `testnet` validating nodes become chunk-only producers.

The desired `testnet` configuration is the following:

* `"num_block_producer_seats": 20,`
* `"num_block_producer_seats_per_shard": [ 20, 20, 20, 20 ],`
* `"num_chunk_only_producer_seats": 100,`

I suggest to implement the change for all networks that are not `mainnet` and
have `use_production_config` in the genesis file. `use_production_config` is a
sneaky parameter in `GenesisConfig` that lets protocol upgrades to change
network's `GenesisConfig`.

I don't have a solid argument for lowering the number of chunk producer seats,
but that reflects the reality that we don't expect a lot of nodes joining
`testnet`. It also makes it easier to test the case of too many validating nodes
willing to join a network.

## Reference Implementation

[#9563](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/9563)

If `use_production_config`, check whether `chain_id` is eligible, then change
the configuration as specified above.

## Security Implications

The block production in `testnet` becomes more centralized. It's not a new
concern as 50% of stake is already owned by nodes operated by the protocol
developers.

## Alternatives

See above.

## Future possibilities

Adjust the number of block and chunk producer seats according to the development
of the number of `testnet` validating nodes.

## Consequences

### Positive

* Chunk-only production gets tested in `testnet`
* Development of State Sync and other features related to chunk-only producers accelerates

### Neutral

* `testnet` block production becomes more centralized

### Negative

* Any?

### Backwards Compatibility

During the protocol upgrade, some nodes will become chunk-only producers.

The piece of code that updates `testnet` configuration value will need to be
kept in the database in case somebody wants to generate `EpochInfo` compatible
with the protocol versions containing the implementation of this NEP.

## Changelog

### 1.0.0 - Initial Version

The Protocol Working Group members approved this NEP on Oct 26, 2023.

[Zulip link](https://near.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/297873-pagoda.2Fnode/topic/How.20to.20test.20a.20chunk-only.20producer.20node.20in.20testnet.3F/near/396090090)

#### Benefits

See [Consequences](#consequences).

#### Concerns

See [Consequences](#consequences).

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
