---
NEP: 417
Title: Meta Transactions
Author: Illia Polosukhin <ilblackdragon@gmail.com>, Egor Uleyskiy (egor.ulieiskii@gmail.com), Alexander Fadeev (fadeevab.com@gmail.com)
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/417
Status: Draft
Type: Protocol Track
Category: Runtime
Created: 19-Oct-2022
---

## Summary

In-protocol meta transactions allowing for third-party account to initiate and pay transaction fees on behalf of the account.

## Motivation

NEAR has been designed with simplicity of onboarding in mind. One of the large hurdles right now is that after creating an implicit or even named account the user does not have NEAR to pay gas fees to interact with apps.

For example, apps that pay user for doing work (like NEARCrowd or Sweatcoin) or free-to-play games.

[Aurora Plus](https://aurora.plus) has shown viability of the relayers that can offer some number of free transactions and a subscription model. Shifting the complexity of dealing with fees to the infrastructure from the user space.

## Rationale and alternatives

The proposed design here provides the easiest way for users and developers to onboard and to pay for user transactions.
There are no requirements on the user account. The user account may not even exist on the chain and an implicit account can be used instead.

An alternative is to a proxy contracts deployed on the user account.
This design has severe limitations as it requires the user to deploy such contract and incur additional costs for storage.

## Specification

The main flow of the meta transaction will be as follows:
 - User requests the relayer for its access key (public key) which the relayer are going to use. The user specifies this key as `relayer_pub_key` in `DelegateAction`.
 - User fetches the relayer's access key `nonce`, increments it and assigns the value to `relayer_nonce` in `DelegateAction`: `relayer_nonce = nonce + 1`.
 - User specifies `sender_id` (the user's account id) and `relayer_id` in `DelegateAction`.
 - User signs `DelegateAction` specifying the set of actions that they need to be executed.
 - User forms `SignedDelegateAction` with the `DelegateAction` and the `DelegateAction` signature.
 - User forms `DelegateActionMessage` with the `SignedDelegateAction`.
 - User sends `DelegateActionMessage` data to the relayer.
 - Relayer verifies actions specified in `DelegateAction`: the total cost and whether the user included the reward for the relayer.
 - Relayer forms a `Transaction` with `receiver_id` equals to `delegate_action.sender_id` and `actions: [SignedDelegateAction { ... }]`. Signs it with its key. Note that such transactions can contain other actions toward user's account (for example calling a function).
 - This transaction is processed normally. A `Receipt` is created with a copy of the actions in the transaction.
 - When processing a `SignedDelegateAction`, a number of checks are done (see below), mainly a check to ensure that the `signature` matches the user account's key.
 - When a `Receipt` with a valid `SignedDelegateAction` in actions arrives at the user's account, it gets executed. Execution means creation of a new Receipt with `receiver_id: AccountId` and `actions: Action` matching `receiver_id` and `actions` in the `DelegateAction`.
 - The new `Receipt` looks like a normal receipt that could have originated from the user's account, with `predeccessor_id` equal to tbe user's account, `signer_id` equal to the relayer's account, `signer_public_key` equal to the relayer's public key.

### DelegateAction

Delegate actions allows for an account to initiate a batch of actions on behalf of a receiving account, allowing proxy actions. This can be used to implement meta transactions.

```rust
pub struct DelegateAction {
    /// Relayer which should submit ansthe delegated actions
    relayer_id: AccountId,
    /// Relayer's public key which should be used for the transaction
    relayer_pub_key: PublicKey,
    /// Nonce to ensure that the same delegate action is not sent twice by a relayer and should match for given account's `relayer_pub_key`.
    /// This nonce is used if `sender_id` account doesn't exist.
    relayer_nonce: Nonce,
    /// Signer of the delegated actions
    sender_id: AccountId,
    /// Receiver of the delegated actions.
    receiver_id: AccountId,
    /// List of actions to be executed.
    actions: Vec<Action>,
    /// Block hash to ensure validity.
    block_hash: CryptoHash,
    /// Public key that is used to sign this delegated action.
    public_key: PublicKey,
    /// Nonce to ensure that the same delegate action is not sent twice by a relayer and should match for given account's `public_key`.
    /// After this action is processed it will increment.
    nonce: Nonce,
}
```

```rust
pub struct SignedDelegateAction {
    delegate_action: DelegateAction,
    /// Signature of the `DelegateAction`.
    signature: Signature,
}
```

 Supporting batches of `actions` means `DelegateAction` can be used initiate a complex steps like creating new accounts, transferring funds, deploying contracts, and executing an initialization function all within the same transaction.

***Validation***:
1. Validate `DelegateAction` doesn't contain a nested `DelegateAction` in actions.
2. To ensure that a `DelegateAction` is correct, on receipt the following signature verification is performed: `verify_signature(hash(delegate_action), delegate_action.public_key, signature)`.
3. Verify `transaction.receiver_id` matches `delegate_action.sender_id`.
4. Verify `delegate_action.block_hash`.
5. If `delegate_action.sender_id` doesn't exist:
    1. Verify `transaction.signer_id == delegate_action.relayer_id`.
    2. Verify `transaction.public_key == delegate_action.relayer_pub_key`.
    3. Verify `transaction.nonce == delegate_action.relayer_nonce`.
    4. Verify `delegate_action.relayer_nonce - 1 == relayer.access_key.nonce`.
6. If `delegate_action.sender_id` exists:
    1. Verify `delegate_action.sender_id` owns `delegate_action.public_key`.
    2. Verify `delegate_action.nonce > sender.access_key.nonce`.

A `message` is formed in the following format:
```rust
struct DelegateActionMessage {
    delegate_action: DelegateAction,
    signature: Signature,
}
```

The next set of security concerns are addressed by this format:
 - `relayer_id` is included to ensure noone else can send `DelegateAction`.
 - `relayer_pub_key` and `relayer_nonce` is included to ensure that `DelegateAction` can't be replayed again.
 - `sender_id` is included to ensure that the relayer set correct `transaction.receiver_id`.
 - `block_hash` is included to ensure that the `DelegateAction` isn't expired.
 - `nonce` is included to ensure that the `DelegateAction` can't be replayed again.
 - `public_key` and `sender_id` are needed to ensure that on the right account, work across rotating keys and fetch correct `nonce`.

The permissions are verified based on the variant of `public_key`:
 - `AccessKeyPermission::FullAccess`, all actions are allowed.
 - `AccessKeyPermission::FunctionCall`, only a single `FunctionCall` action is allowed in `actions`.
    - `DelegateAction.receiver_id` must match to the `account[public_key].receiver_id`
    - `DelegateAction.actions[0].method_name` must be in the `account[public_key].method_names`

***Outcomes***:
- If the `signature` matches the receiver's account's `public_key`, a new receipt is created from this account with a set of `ActionReceipt { receiver_id, action }` for each action in `actions`.

#### Errors

**Validation Error**

- If the `signature` does not match the data and the `public_key` of the given key, then the following error will be returned
```rust
/// Signature does not match the provided actions and given signer public key.
DelegateActionInvalidSignature
```
- If the `sender_id` doesn't match the `tx.receiver_id`
```rust
/// Receiver of the transaction doesn't match Sender of the delegate action
DelegateActionSenderDoesNotMatchReceiver
```

- If `block_hash` is too old
```rust
/// Delegate action has expired
DelegateActionExpired
```

- If the `relayer_id` doesn't match `tx.signer_id`
```rust
/// Relayer doesn't match Signer of the transaction
DelegateActionRelayerDoesNotMatchSigner
```

- If `relayer_pub_key` doesn't match `tx.public_key`
```rust
/// Relayer's public key doesn't match the key used in the transaction
DelegateActionInvalidRelayerKey
```

- If the `relayer_nonce` doesn't match `tx.nonce` or `relayer_nonce - 1 != relayer[relayer_pub_key].nonce`
```rust
/// The nonce must match tx,nonce and must be relayer[relayer_pub_key].nonce + 1
DelegateActionInvalidRelayerNonce
```

- If the `public_key` does not exist for the given account, the following error will be returned
```rust
/// The given public key doesn't match Sender account
DelegateActionPublicKeyDoesNotExist
```

- If the `nonce` does not exist match the `public_key` for the `sender_id`, the the following error will be returned
```rust
/// Nonce must be sender[public_key].nonce + 1
DelegateActionInvalidNonce
```


See the [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for details.

## Security Implications

Delegate actions do not override `signer_public_key`, leaving that to the original signer that initiated transaction (e.g. the relayer in the meta transaction case). Although it is possible to override the `signer_public_key` in the context with one from the `DelegateAction`, there is no clear value in that.

See the ***Validation*** section in [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for security considerations around what the user signs and the validation of actions with different permissions.

## Drawbacks

Increases complexity of NEAR's transactional model.

Meta transactions take an extra block to execute, as they first need to be included by the originating account, then routed to the delegate account, and only after that to the real destination.

Delegate actions are not programmable as they require having signatures. Original proposal contained a new `AccessKey` kind that would support programmable delegated actions. On the other hand, that would be limiting without programmability of smart contracts, hence that idea evolved into [Account Extensions](https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/346).

## Future possibilities

Supporting ZK proofs instead of just signatures can allow for anonymous transactions, which pay fees to relayers anonymously.

## Copyright
[copyright]: #copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
